Add MQTT client authentication (#1864)
thin-edge/thin-edge.io: docs/src/howto-guides/029_mqtt_local_broker_authentication.md

# Use MQTT authentication for local broker

> thin-edge.io supports using certificate-based authentication when communicating
> with a local broker. There are 3 ways thin-edge.io can use when connecting to
> Mosquitto broker:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
thin-edge.io supports certificate-based authentication when communicating
with an MQTT broker. Three levels of security are supported:
```

Author: fixed

1. No authentication (default)
2. Server authentication
3. Server + client authentication

## Server authentication

Enabling server authentication causes thin-edge.io MQTT clients to require a
valid certificate from a broker when connecting. The broker certificate is valid
when it is signed by a CA that the clients trust.

To enable server authentication, perform the following:

### Step 1: Configure server authenticated listener in Mosquitto broker

Create a file in `/etc/mosquitto/conf.d/` with the following content and restart
mosquitto service:

```conf
listener 8883
certfile PATH_TO_SERVER_CERTIFICATE
keyfile  PATH_TO_SERVER_PRIVATE_KEY
```

- `listener 8883`: defines a new listener on port 8883
- `certfile`: points to a certificate that will be used by the broker to
  authenticate itself to connecting clients
- `keyfile`: points to a private key of the specified certificate, necessary for

>   encrypted communication

Reviewer: What is document here is correct. However, I would like to stress that preparing such a configuration file is the point of the `mqtt.external.*` settings of `tedge config`.

```
tedge config list --doc | grep mqtt.external    
mqtt.external.port             Mqtt broker port, which is used by the external mqtt clients to publish or subscribe. Example: 8883
mqtt.external.bind_address     IP address / hostname, which the mqtt broker limits incoming connections on. Example: 0.0.0.0
mqtt.external.bind_interface   Name of network interface, which the mqtt broker limits incoming connections on. Example: wlan0
mqtt.external.capath           Path to a file containing the PEM encoded CA certificates that are trusted when checking incoming client certificates. Example: /etc/ssl/certsNote: If the capath is not set, then no certificates are required for the external connections.
mqtt.external.certfile         Path to the certificate file, which is used by external MQTT listenerExample: /etc/tedge/device-certs/tedge-certificate.pemNote: This setting shall be used together with `mqtt.external.keyfile` for external connections.
mqtt.external.keyfile          Path to the private key file, which is used by external MQTT listenerExample: /etc/tedge/device-certs/tedge-private-key.pemNote: This setting shall be used together with `mqtt.external.certfile` for external connections.
```

- See https://thin-edge.github.io/thin-edge.io/html/howto-guides/013_connect_external_device.html.
- @Bravo555  Change nothing for your current PR. In a follow-up task, we will have to assess if something need to be change for this `mqtt.external` setting.
- @reubenmiller I think this `mqtt.external` setting is badly named making things confusing.

Reviewer 2: > @reubenmiller I think this mqtt.external setting is badly named making things confusing.

Yes I fully agree. It is really just a binding address, it does not matter if it is "internal" or "external"...but yes it can be done as a later stage.

restart mosquitto service:

```conf
listener 8883
allow_anonymous false
require_certificate true
cafile   PATH_TO_SERVER_CERTIFICATE
certfile PATH_TO_SERVER_PRIVATE_KEY
keyfile  PATH_TO_CLIENT_CA_CERTIFICATE
```

- `allow_anonymous` disables anonymous access to the listener; connecting
  clients will need to authenticate themselves
- `require_certificate` requires clients to provide a certificate as a means of
  authentication

### Step 2: Configure thin-edge.io to use a client certificate and private key

```sh
tedge config set mqtt.client.auth.cert_file PATH_TO_CLIENT_CERTIFICATE
tedge config set mqtt.client.auth.key_file PATH_TO_CLIENT_PRIVATE_KEY
```

Both `cert_file` and `key_file` are required to enable client authentication.
Setting only one of them will result in an error about the second one not being
set.

As with the server private key, set `tedge:tedge` as the owner of the
certificate and the private key, so that the private key can be read by
thin-edge components.

### Step 3: Restart services

Now you will need to manually restart all the affected services so that they can
pick up the configuration change.

## Generating certificates

> You can use the following script to generate all required certificates:

Reviewer: @reubenmiller We can consider to extend the `tedge cert create` command to create such certificates.
